A restored sepia and blue toned photograph shows a heavily-laden dhoni, a single sail, moving lazily across the Male' bay out towards the sea. In the distance you could make out another much larger wooden cargo dhow, moored near what appears to be either Aarah or Funadhoo. The 'vaaru baththeli' or cargo ship carries goods meant for Male' from the outer atolls. An annual tribute. Its deck is study and neat, built with the best timbers imported from India. A main house protects the cargo from the elements. It is built with wood from the breadfruit tree and nirolhu vakaru. Dhumburi and palm tree thatches are used for the roof and exterior housing. The housing of the baththeli 'dhow', is 24 riyans long. A riyan is equal to 27 inches, also 24 angoo. Three kaivai is equal to one Riyan. And thats 2ft, 3in (685.8mm).

The Peoples house; Raiyithunge was located at Bodumagu, on the North Western Shore, where Rasmagu ended to the North East of the present day Republic Square. It was a square structure with a portico surrounding it on all sides. Four rooms served as Cargo storages, administrative office and secure quarters. An additional anterior room to the western side was made for another purpose. Possibly to draft workmen to carry goods from the Dhonis to the shore. The goods were unloaded from the trade dhows to these ships. Raiyithunge was an elevated structure on concrete stilts. Two steps of stairs raised 3.5ft took you up to the entrance from the Northern side and through the interior corridor and again out from the southern end. The doors of the storage rooms opened to the Southern corridor.

The Vaaru Baththeli, cargo ship (dow) is at least 21 riyans long. It was built by carpenters from Dharavandoo, under the supervision of Dharavandoo, Maavadi Moosa Thakurufaanu (Moosa Dhonbe). Also among the workers there was Malik Hassan Ibrahim Fulhu, Dhangandu Thalhaa Ibrahim Fulhu, Yoosub Mohamed, Moosa Thakurufaanuge Yoosub and others. The story of how Maavadi Moosa Thakurufaanu felled palm trees, and carried the rough-sewn lumber to the boathouse by himself is well known. Less well-known is the account of how the workers built a huge hookah, from which they smoked collectively while they built the ship. It was said that this communal hookah had 10 pipes coming out from it and was constructed out of metal clay and  palm and bamboo reeds, covered with cloth soaked in water and covered with leaves for cooling. And that the workers would all return to it at once and draw smoke from the pipes and exhale together. Aan kiyaafa.

The Male trip was made by able bodied men after drawing lots. You had to be at least 15 years of age to make the long trip. Each group that had its number drawn had to choose a leader among themselves. A nevi, or leader, navigator was also chosen and was usually the leader of the trip apart from the captain who commandeered the dow. It was the nevis job to value the ships cargo, most importantly the dried and smoked fish goods, rope and other items. He made the payments for the fish.
